… In remembrance of Oluwashewu, Printed Skirt, Penarity, Onicha, and the rest. May their ungentle souls rest in imperfect peace. nemA.

***

Olodoness, olodoism, olodoly are solely the writer’s coinage: rooted in the Nigerian word, Olodo, which etymologically belongs to the Nigerian Yoruba tribe.

Olodo refers to a person who is naïve: a person who is not in the know. In an extreme instance, a dullard.

Olodoness then, is a state of being bereft of knowledge or knowing sufficiently little. Or a state of knowing wrongly. In an overly graduated level, it is a state of being in which one is a dullard. But there’s no doubt – my reader is not a dullard.

Not until recent did I realize the gravity of my own share of it: I made a post (so I-no-send-you-ly) in which I mentioned‘printed’ skirts. And up until that moment a dear lady commented, I had had no idea whatsoever, of anything ‘pleated’ about a skirt. I heard ‘printed’, I said ‘printed’; and eventually (a bit of a disgrace), I posted about the dame ‘printed’, and the post was public. Pride aside, my wrong knowledge was busted for my good; and for your good, if you have been an olodo just learning about the ‘pleated’ version from this read.

To be sure that you’re sure that I am no better than a toddler learning to work his limbs, I made a shabby timeline of some other instances of my olodoness and their gracious fixes. And I assume it to be true that all of the following happened before I was old enough to vote.

***
Sometime in my life, I wrote my Yoruba name as‘OluwaSHewu’. Story changed when I met a proper Yoruba guy who was a Secondary school mate. He was called Seyi (Oluwaseyi in full), pronounced as ‘SHeyi’, spelt without the ‘H’; and that meant that mine should be ‘Oluwaseun’. Being an Igbo teen with little or no Yoruba language experience, I had no idea that the Yoruba language has no letter ‘SH’ in its alphabet (Igbo language does). Rather, there was a variety of an ‘S’ that served the purpose of a ‘SH’. So while I wallowed in my olodoness, wherever it pleased me to sample my Yoruba name, it was ‘Oluwashewu’ like I-don’t-care.

The words ‘coNvenant’ and ‘eNternity’ were innocent church words, said with emphasis on ‘N’as certain brethren who are fond of vocalizing religious cants would say them. Nicely, ‘covenant’ and ‘eternity’ revealed their existences early enough to my vocabulary life. And I do appreciate it that they did.

Highly ranked among childhood wrongly pronounced terms was ‘penarity’: a corrupted English form and an assumed Igbo variant for ‘penalty’. I and my playmates would say ‘penarity’ kick, and casually without the kick,during soccer sessions where there was a foul committed that called for it. Recently, I heard a grown-up in his middle or late 20s saying it so freely that I became both embarrassed and ashamed on his behalf. 

There was a time that ‘to mesmerize’ meant ‘to mess up’ (olodoly enough, sorry to say, a good number of people I listen to still use this word in that sense). Thanks to a friend who made me learn of ‘hypnotize’ – another word that serves as a proper substitute – my vocabulary bank was well updated.

O-N-I-C-H-A was my spelling for Onitsha till sometime in Primary Four. My class teacher spotted an expression of olodoness in my essay; she called me up to her table and carefully transferred sense. I understood from her correction that ‘Onicha’ may be right but for the influence of the language with which the British modified the way I was to spell certain nouns of mother-tongue origin. So, although it would be correct to write it as Owere, Enugwu, and ?ka (based on mother-tongue phonology), I may be marked low for a wrong spelling if I didn’t use their respective corrupted Igbo but proper English forms – Owerri, Enugu, and Awka.
***

And until you learn, you may still take‘Immorality’to mean ONLY sex related misdoings. This may not sound fair, but it’s an acceptance of sheer olodoism to use immorality only when referring to offenses of sexual orientation. Kindly borrow a dictionary and learn. And if you’re chummy with the word, it’s not in any way bulky to append ‘sexual’ when you use it –for specificity.

To the folk of the Christian faith who still take ‘memory’ to mean ‘brain power’ or ‘intellectual ability’in the statement, “The memory of the just is blessed…” (Proverbs 10:7, KJV): I am not an authority in theology and Bible matters. But I solidly believe that that word, in the context of its containing verse,implies ‘remembrance’, so that a paraphrase of the statement could be that, a person whose deeds are upright will be gladly remembered; or that they will leave us with blessed memories about the good things they had done when they are gone.To state the obvious anyway, my understanding of this statement doesn’t imply that God may not grant requests for intellectual grace built upon your faith in what you understand it to be. Only submit to what His Spirit teaches you. Nonetheless, as Apostle Paul would say, I think I have the Spirit of God. And that no be quarrel.

***

I’ve learnt from the foregoing that that a fellow brags about some knowledge they gained (whether tiny or huge), or skill they acquired, should wow you less than it should make you improve on yourself. Even a revered egghead is an olodo in a field unbeknown to them.

You may know much, or perhaps too much, but the muchness is still within the walls of what you know – and at times, it’s just about what you think you know until when you come to know that you really didn’t know what you thought you knew.

Did I tell you that ‘OluwaSHewu’, instead of ‘Oluwaseun’, was used as a middle name on a certificate of mine? Olodoness didn’t help a thing.

So keep learning; keep developing yourself. Improve! Teach others as much as you can, and always encourage as many people as you can to never stop learning and developing themselves.

It pays good to really know.
